MEMBERS

  GO
EVENTS &  MEET INGS

Search
ABOUT
NEWS

MODEL LEG ISLAT ION

TASK FORCES

LOGIN |  LOGOUT |  HOME |  JO IN  ALEC |  CONTACT
ALEC   INIT IAT IVES
PUBLICAT IONS

Mode l Legislation
Civil Justice

Commerce, Insurance,
and Economic
Development

Education

Energy, Environment,
and Agriculture

Federal Relations

Health and Human
Services

International Relations

Public  Safety and
E lec tions

Tax and F iscal Po licy

Telecommunications
and Information
Techno logy

Pr int  this Page
Tex t-Only  Page
Ema il  this Page

Home

 Model Leg islation
 Civil Justice
Private Attorney Retention Sunshine Act
 
Section 1. {Title}
Th is act may be known  as the Private Attorney Retent ion  Sunsh ine Act
 
Section 2. {Definitions}
A.  For the purposes of th is Act, a contract in  excess of $1 ,000 ,000  is one in  wh ich  the fee
paid  to an  attorney or group  of attorneys, either in  the form  of a flat, hourly, or
cont ingent fee, and  their expenses, exceeds or can  be reasonab ly expected  to exceed
$1 ,000 ,000 .
B.  For the purposes of th is Act, “fees” shall inc lude any compensat ion  for legal services
however measured , inc lud ing  but not lim ited  to flat, hourly, and  cont ingent fees.
 
Section 3. {Procurement}
Any state agency or state agent that wishes to retain  a lawyer or law firm  to perform  legal
services on  behalf of th is state, where the fees and  expenses for such  services will exceed
or can  be reasonab ly expected  to exceed  one hundred  thousand  dollars ($100 ,000), shall
not do so unt il an  open  and  compet it ive b idd ing  process has been  undertaken . [Refer to
exist ing  state thresholds and  requ irements for procuring  outside services by b id]
 
Section 4. {Oversight}
No state agency or state agent shall enter into a contract for legal services exceed ing  one
m illion  dollars ($1 ,000 ,000) without the opportun ity for leg islat ive review of the terms of
the contract in  accordance with  Sect ion  5 .
 
Section 5. {Implementation}
A. Except as provided  in  Sect ion  5(E ), any state agency or state agent
proposing  to enter into a contract for legal services exceed ing  $1 ,000 ,000
shall file a copy of the proposed  contract with  the c lerk of the House of
Representat ives and  shall also accompany such  proposed  contract with  a
written  statement that ident ifies:
 
(1) the reasons the state shou ld  retain  private counsel and  the considerat ion  of
alternat ives;
 
(2) the open  and  compet it ive b idd ing  process that has been
undertaken  with  respect to the proposed  legal services;
 
(3) the reasons for the select ion  of the lawyer or law firm  that is
the proposed  contract ing  party;
 
(4) the past or present relat ionsh ip , if any, between  such  lawyer,
law firm , or any partner or other princ ipal in  such  law firm  and  the state
agency or state agent proposing  to enter into the contract; and
 
(5) if the contract contemp lates that all or part of the fee is
cont ingent on  the outcome of the legal proceed ing , the reasons the
cont ingent fee arrangement is believed  to be in  the state’s interest and
any efforts undertaken  to obtain  private counsel on  a non -cont ingent fee
basis.
 
B. Except as provided  in  Sect ion  5(F), the c lerk of the House of Representat ives, with  the
approval of the President of the Senate and  the Speaker of the House of Representat ives,
shall prompt ly refer such  proposed  contract and  written  statement to the appropriate
comm ittee for review.
C. With in  45  days after the filing  of said  proposed  contract and  statement with  the c lerk,
the reviewing  comm ittee may hold  a pub lic  hearing  on  said  proposed  contract and ,
whether or not a pub lic  hearing  is held , shall issue a report to the referring  state agency
or state agent. Said  report shall inc lude any recommended  changes to the proposed
contract approved  by the comm ittee. I f the reviewing  comm ittee recommends no
changes to the proposed  contract with in  45  days of the in it ial filing  of the proposed
contract with  the c lerk of the House of Representat ives, the referring  state agency or
state agent may enter into the proposed  contract.  I f the report of the reviewing
comm ittee recommends changes to the proposed  contract in  accordance with  th is
paragraph , the state agency or state agent shall review said  report and  prepare a revised
contract as deemed  appropriate in  view of said  report and  shall file with  the c lerk of the
House of Representat ives a copy of the revised  contract. 
D. I f the revised  contract does not contain  all changes recommended  by the reviewing
comm ittee, the referring  state agency or state agent shall inc lude with  the revised
contract filed  with  said  c lerk a letter stat ing  the reasons why the recommended  changes
were not adopted . Said  c lerk shall prompt ly refer such  letter and  revised  contract to the
reviewing  comm ittee, wh ich  may hold  add it ional hearings and  issue add it ional reports in
its d iscret ion . Not earlier than  45  days after the filing  of such  letter and  revised  contract

 

its d iscret ion . Not earlier than  45  days after the filing  of such  letter and  revised  contract
with  the c lerk, the referring  state agency or state agent may enter into the revised
contract.  Notwithstand ing  anyth ing  in  th is Sect ion , any revised  contract contain ing
terms not previously reviewed  or recommended  by said  reviewing  comm ittee that can
reasonab ly be expected  to increase the fees and  expenses to be paid  shall be treated  as a
new proposed  contract and  shall be filed  and  reviewed  in  accordance with  Paragraphs A-
D.
E . In  the event that the leg islature is not in  session  and  the state agency or state agent
wishes to enter into a contract for legal services exceed ing  $1 ,000 ,000 , the proposed
contract and  written  statement described  in  Sec . 5(A)(1) and  (2) shall be filed  with  the
Governor in  add it ion  to the c lerk of the House of Representat ives.  Except as provided  in
Sec . 5(F), the Governor shall estab lish  a five-member interim  comm ittee consist ing  of five
state leg islators, one each  to be appointed  by the Governor, the Speaker of the House,
the President of the Senate, and  the m inority leader in  each  house of the leg islature, to
execute the leg islat ive oversight dut ies set forth  in  paragraphs B-C of th is sect ion .  All
dead lines and  responsib ilit ies set forth  in  those paragraphs shall app ly as though  the
interim  comm ittee were a comm ittee of the leg islature.
F. In  the event the state agency or state agent in  a writ ing  filed  with  the Governor and
the c lerk of the House of Representat ives states that t ime exigenc ies requ ire that the
state retain  counsel before the periods provided  in  Sect ion  5(A) – (D) have elapsed , and
provides the reasons therefor, the Governor shall estab lish  a five-member comm ittee,
with  members appointed  as provided  in  Sect ion  5(E ), to wh ich  the proposed  contract
and  written  statement described  in  Sect ion  5(A)(1) and  (2) shall be referred .  Said
comm ittee shall consu lt with  the state agency or state agent to estab lish  an  exped ited
schedu le for review and  recommendat ions on  the proposed  contract.
Section 6. {Contingent Fees} –  Maximum  Hourly Charges}
A. At the conc lusion  of any legal proceed ing  for wh ich  a state agency or agent retained
outside counsel on  a cont ingent fee basis, the state shall receive from  counsel a
statement of the hours worked  on  the case, expenses incurred , the aggregate fee
amount, and  a breakdown  as to the hourly rate, based  on  hours worked  d ivided  into fee
recovered , less expenses.
B. In  no case shall the state incur fees and  expenses in  excess of $1 ,000  per hour for
legal services. In  cases where a d isc losure subm itted  in  accordance with  paragraph  (a) of
th is sect ion  ind icates an  hourly rate in  excess of $1 ,000  per hour, the fee amount shall be
reduced  to an  amount equ ivalent to $1 ,000  per hour.
 
Section 7.   {No Expansion of Authority}
Noth ing  in  th is Act shall be construed  to expand  the authority of any state agency or
state agent to enter into contracts where no such  authority previously existed .

{Severab ility Clause}
{Repealer Clause}
{E ffect ive Date}
 
 

Orig inally adopted  by ALEC's Civil Just ice Task Force at the Annual Meet ing  August 20 ,
1998   Approved  by fu ll ALEC Board  of Directors September, 1998 .  Amended  at the
Spring  Task Force Summ it April 30 , 2005 .

About   Members   Login   Logout   Events &  Meetings
Model Legis lation   Task Forces   ALEC   Initiatives   Publications   Home
Jo in ALEC   Contact   News

