FIRST REGULAR SESSION
HOUSE BILL NO. 255

96TH GENERAL ASSEMBLY

INTRODUCED BY REPRESENTATIVES COX (Sponsor),
NANCE AND GATSCHENBERGER (Co-sponsors).

0666L.01I

D. ADAM CRUMBLISS, Chief Clerk

AN ACT

To amend chapter 484, RSMo, by adding thereto one new section relating to the private attorney
retention act.

Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the state of Missouri, as follows:

Section A.  Chapter 484, RSMo, is amended by adding thereto one new section, to be
known as section 484.500, to read as follows:
484.500.  1.  This act shall be known as the "Private Attorney Retention Act".
2.  (1)  For the purposes of this section, a contract in excess of one million dollars is
one which  the  fee paid to an attorney or group of attorneys, either  in the form of a flat,
hourly, or  contingent  fee, and  their  expenses,  exceeds or  can be  reasonably  expected  to
exceed one million dollars.
(2)   For  purposes  of  this  section  "fees"  shall  include  any  compensation  for  legal
services however measured, including but not limited to flat, hourly, and contingent fees.
3.   Any  state  agency  or  state  agent  that wishes  to  retain  a  lawyer  or  law  firm  to
perform legal services on behalf of this state, where the fees and expenses for such services
will exceed or can be reasonably expected to exceed one hundred thousand dollars, shall
not do so until an open and competitive bidding process has been undertaken.
4.    No  state  agency  or  state  agent  shall  enter  into  a  contract  for  legal  services
exceeding one million dollars without the opportunity for legislative review of the terms
of the contract in accordance with the provisions of subsection 5 of this section.
5.  (1)  Except as provided in subdivision (5) of this subsection, any state agency or
state  agent  proposing  to  enter  into  a  contract  for  legal  services  exceeding  one  million

2

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16

[thus] in the above bill is not enacted and is intended
EXPLANATION — Matter enclosed in bold-faced brackets 
to be omitted from the law. Matter in bold-face type in the above bill is proposed language.

HB 255

2

17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52

dollars  shall  file  a  copy  of  the  proposed  contract  with  the  clerk  of  the  house  of
representatives and shall also accompany such proposed contract with a written statement
that identifies:
(a)   The  reasons  the  state  should  retain private  counsel and  the  consideration of
alternatives;
(b)    The  open  and  competitive  bidding  process  that  has  been  undertaken  with
respect to the proposed legal services;
(c)    The  reasons  for  the  selection  of  the  lawyer  or  law  firm  that  is  the  proposed
contracting party;
(d)  The past or present relationship, if any, between such lawyer, law firm, or any
partner or other principal in such law firm and the state agency or state agent proposing
to enter into the contract; and
(e)    If  the  contract  contemplates  that  all  or  part  of  the  fee  is  contingent  on  the
outcome of the legal proceeding, the reasons the contingent fee arrangement is believed to
be  in  the  state's  interest  and  any  efforts  undertaken  to  obtain  private  counsel  on  a
noncontingent fee basis.
(2)  Except as provided in subdivision (6) of this subsection, the clerk of the house
of representatives, with the approval of the president of the senate and speaker of the house
of representatives, shall promptly refer such proposed contract and written statement to
the appropriate committee for review.
(3)  Within forty-five days after the filing of the proposed contract and statement
with  the  clerk,  the  reviewing  committee  may  hold  a  public  hearing  on  the  proposed
contract and, whether or not a public hearing is held, shall issue a report to the referring
state  agency  or  state  agent.   The  report  shall  include  any  recommended  changes  to  the
proposed contract approved by the committee.  If the reviewing committee recommends
no  changes  to  the  proposed  contract  within  forty-five  days  of  the  initial  filing  of  the
proposed contract with the clerk of the house of representatives, the referring state agency
or  state  agent  may  enter  into  the  proposed  contract.    If  the  report  of  the  reviewing
committee recommends changes to the proposed contract in accordance with the provisions
of this subdivision, the state agency or state agent shall review the report and prepare a
revised contract as deemed appropriate in view of the report and shall file with the clerk
of the house of representatives a copy of the revised contract.
(4)    If  the  revised  contract  does  not  contain  all  changes  recommended  by  the
reviewing committee, the referring state agency or state agent shall include with the revised
contract  filed with  the  clerk a  letter  stating  the  reasons why  the  recommended  changes
were not adopted.  The clerk shall promptly refer such letter and revised contract to the

HB 255

3

53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88

reviewing committee, which may hold additional hearings and issue additional reports in
its discretion.   Not earlier  than  forty-five days after  the  filing of  such  letter and revised
contract with the clerk, the referring state agency or state agent may enter into the revised
contract.    Notwithstanding  any  provision  of  this  subsection,  any  revised  contract
containing  terms not previously reviewed or recommended by  the reviewing committee
that  can  reasonably  be  expected  to  increase  the  fees  and  expenses  to  be  paid  shall  be
treated  as  a new proposed  contract and  shall be  filed  and  reviewed  in accordance with
subdivisions (1), (2), (3), and (4) of this subsection.
(5)  In the event that the legislature is not  in session and the state agency or state
agent wishes to enter into a contract for legal services exceeding one million dollars, the
proposed contract and written statement described in paragraphs (a) and (b) of subdivision
(1) of this subsection shall be filed with the governor in addition to the clerk of the house
of representatives.  Except as provided in subdivision (6) of this subsection the governor
shall establish a five-member interim committee consisting of five state legislators, one each
to be appointed by the governor, the speaker of the house of representatives, the president
pro tem of the senate, and the minority leader in each house of the legislature, to execute
the legislative oversight duties set forth in subdivisions (2) and (3) of this subsection.  All
deadlines  and  responsibilities  set  forth  in  those  subdivisions  shall  apply  as  though  the
interim committee were a committee of the legislature.
(6)  In the event the state agency or state agent in a writing filed with the governor
and the clerk of the house of representatives states that time exigencies require that  the
state retain counsel before the periods provided in subdivisions (1), (2), (3), and (4) of this
subsection have elapsed, and provides the reasons therefor, the governor shall establish a
five-member  committee, with members appointed as  provided  in  subdivision  (5) of  this
subsection to which the proposed contract and written statement described in paragraphs
(a)  and  (b)  of  subdivision  (1)  of  this  subsection  shall  be  referred.    The  committee  shall
consult with the state agency or state agent to establish an expedited schedule for review
and recommendations on the proposed contract.
6.  (1)  At the conclusion of any legal proceeding for which a state agency or state
agent retained outside counsel on a contingent fee basis, the state shall receive from counsel
a statement of the hours worked on the case, expenses incurred, the aggregate fee amount,
and a breakdown as to the hourly rate, based on hours worked divided into fee recovered,
less expenses.
(2)  In no case shall the state incur fees and expenses in excess of two hundred fifty
dollars per hour for legal services.  In cases where a disclosure submitted in accordance
with subdivision (1) of this subsection indicates an hourly rate in excess of two hundred

HB 255

4

89
90
91
92

fifty  dollars  per  hour,  the  fee  amount  shall  be  reduced  to  an  amount  equivalent  to  two
hundred fifty dollars per hour.
7.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to expand the authority of any state
agency or state agent to enter into contracts where no such authority previously existed.
T

